The OIDC docs (#3656)
gitpod-io/website: gitpod/docs/configure/workspaces/oidc.md

> # OIDC in Gitpod

Reviewer: Probably it's worth including the full form here? 

```suggestion
# OpenID Connect (OIDC) in Gitpod
```

Author: Sure, sounds better indeed.

> You can now use OIDC authentication to connect Gitpod workspaces to cloud providers and/or other third party services such as AWS, Azure, GCP, or secret management services like Vault. Through OIDC you can connect with a secret store using a temporary access token and eliminate the need to manually distribute secrets through environment variables. You can fetch temporary access tokens for your workspaces, which gives you fine-grained control over which of your Gitpod workspaces can have certain access.

Reviewer: * Remove "now" as it reads like a point-in-time blog post
* Swap "secrets store" for more generic "third party"

```suggestion
You can use OIDC authentication to connect Gitpod workspaces to cloud providers and/or other third party services such as AWS, Azure, GCP, or secret management services like Vault. Through OIDC you can connect with a third party, eliminating the need to manually distribute access credentials, secrets and other key material via environment variables. 
```

Author: Love this.

> ## What is OIDC?

Author: Pushed https://github.com/gitpod-io/website/pull/3656/commits/6cd24f50780cbf90691bf2352f2123ee208f530c, WDYT?

OpenID Connect (OIDC) allows third-party applications to verify identity. <abbr title="JSON Web Token">JWT</abbr>s contain claims (such as a name or email address) about your workspace. You can create custom claims and add them to your tokens.

> ## Setting up OIDC Authentication with Any Provider

Reviewer: We should callout the main three steps: 

1. Establish trust
2. Setup trust rules
3. Exchange the JWT token

I'm not sure that the AWS diagram is the right choice here, since it might make this look like an AWS specific feature. We should consider a generic one, or at least one with different logo's, potentially. Reserving the AWS diagram(s) for the AWS specific page. 

```suggestion
## Setting up OIDC Authentication with Any Provider
```

Author: > I'm not sure that the AWS diagram is the right choice here

@loujaybee do you have a file which I can edit to change the diagram?

I precisely didn't want to put the diagram into the AWS docs because the diagram primarily says "3rd party" and only adds AWS as an example (therefore I see it fit, but understand your counter of the logo being there). Let's change the logo (maybe even the example? personally would keep it) and leave it?

<figure>

> ![](/images/docs/oidc-flow.png)

Reviewer 2: This would act as Alt title for the image on post-render of markdown 🙂.
```suggestion
![OIDC flow via Gitpod](/images/docs/oidc-flow.png)
```

Author: I'm not sure what that means but LGTM 😆

<figcaption>
    Sequence diagram of Authentication via OIDC using AWS with Gitpod
</figcaption>

</figure>

**Read more:**

> - https://auth0.com/docs/authenticate/protocols/openid-connect-protocol

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [[Auth0 docs] OIDC Protocol](https://auth0.com/docs/authenticate/protocols/openid-connect-protocol)
```

> ## Experimental Gitpod CLI integration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Gitpod CLI integration
```

**Suggestion:** Let's mark this as "beta", and include the same type of banner from the other pages, e.g.

I'm not a fan of "experimental" as it leaves a lot of ambiguity around the support status of the feature. 

![image](https://github.com/gitpod-io/website/assets/5528307/a17cb4f1-3c72-40eb-9f85-b97045cfa278)

Author: @loujaybee should we include the sign-up form in the <kbd>Beta</kbd> callout?

Reviewer: Change of plan, can we: 

* Include the documentation in `menu.ts` for the menu bar.
* Not include the beta banner for now. 
* Remove the experimental labelling. 

🙏

You can interface with Gitpod's IdP using the `gp idp` subcommand. To retrieve the OIDC token for the current workspace simply run `gp idp token`, to return a JWT that can be exchanged with a third party service to grant access.

> For example, to request a new OIDC JWT for `example.org` you'll need to execute `gp idp token --audience example.org`, the output of which you can use to authenticate yourself.

Reviewer 2: **Suggestion**: At last of this page, we can add a CTA for something like - Try it yourself and link `/docs/integrations/aws` page.

Author: Did something in https://github.com/gitpod-io/website/pull/3656/commits/946e115b83e242752896a5a7fb7c11e7e245bc59, WDYT?

Reviewer 2: Looks better, thanks :)

---
section: configure
title: OpenID Connect
---

<script context="module">
  export const prerender = true;
</script>

# OpenID Connect (OIDC) in Gitpod

> You can use OIDC authentication to connect Gitpod workspaces to cloud providers and/or other third party services such as AWS, Azure, GCP, or secret management services like Vault. Through OIDC you can connect with a third party, eliminating the need to manually distribute access credentials, secrets and other key material via environment variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use OIDC authentication to connect Gitpod workspaces to cloud providers or third parties such as: AWS, Azure, GCP, or secret management services like Vault. Use of OIDC integration eliminates the need to manually distribute access credentials, secrets and other key material via other methods such as environment variables.
```

## What is OIDC?

> OpenID Connect (OIDC) is a simple identity layer on top of the [OAuth 2.0 protocol](https://oauth.net/2/), which allows clients to verify the identity of an end-user based on the authentication performed by an authorization server, as well as to obtain basic profile information about the end-user in an interoperable and REST-like manner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenID Connect (OIDC) is a simple identity layer on top of the [OAuth 2.0 protocol](https://oauth.net/2/), which allows clients to verify identity.
```

> OIDC introduces the concept of an Identity Token, a security token that allows the client to verify the identity of the user. The token is a <abbr title="JSON Web Token">JWT</abbr> that contains claims about the user. Claims are statements about a user, and can contain user information such as a name or email address.

Author: ```suggestion
OIDC leverages use of a JWT, a security token that allows the client to verify the identity of the caller. The token is a <abbr title="JSON Web Token">JWT</abbr> that contains claims about the caller. Claims are statements about a caller and can contain information such as a name, email address or repository metadata.
```

OIDC provides a reliable way to establish a user's identity, including the ability to authenticate them and get their basic profile information. It gives third-party applications a standardized, secure, and scalable method to authenticate and authorize users. When used in combination with Gitpod, it helps in automating the secure access to 3rd-party services that your workspaces might need to interact with.

## Setting up OIDC Authentication with Any Provider

Setting up OIDC Authentication generally involves three main steps:

> 1. **Establish Trust**: This is where you register your application with the OIDC Provider (like AWS, Google, etc.). The provider then gives your application a unique client ID and secret, which your application uses to prove its identity to the provider.

Author: ```suggestion
1. **Establish Trust**: You first need to register Gitpod with your OIDC-supported third party (like AWS, Google, etc.). This third party then becomes the audience in your JWT token generated in Gitpod. 
```

> 1. **Setup Trust Rules**: This involves setting up rules on the provider's end about what information the provider can share with your application, and under what conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Setup Trust Rules**: The 3rd party usually allows you to configure what the configuration of the JWT claims must be to exchanged for a valid auth token. Here you can implement fine-grained controls over what access is granted. 
```

> 1. **Exchange the JWT Token**: After trust is established and rules are set up, Gitpod's <abbr title="Identity Provider">IdP</abbr> will issue JWT tokens, which your application can then use to verify the identity of the user and gain access to their information according to the rules set up in the previous step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Exchange the JWT Token**: After both trust and trust rules are established with the 3rd party you can then use the JWT tokens generated by the `gp idp token` command to authorise JWT tokens against the 3rd party. 
```

<figure>

![OIDC flow via Gitpod](/images/docs/oidc-flow.png)

<figcaption>
    Sequence diagram of Authentication via OIDC using AWS with Gitpod
</figcaption>

> Although this process is universal for all OIDC-compatible providers, we maintain the following docs that go in detail on setting them up:

Author: Ooooh I like this one, neat!

- [AWS](/docs/integrations/aws)

</figure>

**Read more:**

- [[Auth0 docs] OpenID Connect Protocol](https://auth0.com/docs/authenticate/protocols/openid-connect-protocol)

## Experimental Gitpod CLI integration

You can retrieve a JWT token for OIDC using `gp idp` subcommand. To retrieve the OIDC token for the current workspace run `gp idp token`.

For example, to request a new OIDC JWT for `example.org` you'll need to execute `gp idp token --audience example.org`, the output of which you can use to authenticate yourself.

### Example usage

```bash
$ gp idp token --audience example.org
eyJhbGciOiJSUzI1NiIsImtpZCI6ImlkLTE2ODQ3NTc4MDY...

$ jwt decode eyJh...
{
  "aud": [
    "example.org"
  ],
  "auth_time": 1684777794,
  "azp": "example.org",
  "c_hash": "gc_vPbUNoCT0UmXDCdp1sw",
  "email": "kumquat@gitpod.io",
  "email_verified": true,
  "exp": 1684781394,
  "iat": 1684777794,
  "iss": "https://api.gitpod.io/idp",
  "name": "Kumquat The Third",
  "sub": "https://github.com/gitpod-io/website/pull/1"

> }

Reviewer: It might make sense to just include the JWT decoded as a separate block, rather than having `jwt decode eyJh...` ellipses, as the `jwt` command is not included in our workspace images, it might make it more clear.

Author: Decided to remove the usage of `jwt` altogether, it does not add value in this context and mainly causes confusion.

---

> section: configure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
section: workspaces
```
